ZHI-GNAS

(From a talk by Namkhai Norbu November 8 & 9, 1984)

Now I will repeat a little what was explained yesterday. I repeat every time, because what I'm teaching must be understood and known. What I'm teaching, what one must do, must become a bit familiar to you. It is not necessary to collect many different items because usually we're accustomed to doing that.

For example, going to different teachers and harvesting teachings from them, we always have the attitude that what we are looking for is somehow mysterious. And this way we also make a collection or harvest of books that have been written, and no one of them becomes familiar to us. And above all, these don't become a way to enter into practice. And that's really too bad. And that type of seeking doesn't please me at all. And even when a person understands that this is what he's doing, it doesn't please me, because what I'm doing, with all my heart, is seeking to make you understand.

What I'm making you understand is not a matter of my explaining some kind of analysis and your writing a few lines in a notebook, but what's to be understood is something you must do. And you can understand directly, and you can then utilize, this is what's meant by understanding.

There is also a principle of the teaching, that he who teaches, if he is a teacher then he has his commitment, his duty; his duty is to transmit and transmitting means first of all to make understood. When one has understood, then one enters into practice. That one goes into practice or not, that depends also very much on how it's being transmitted, how it's been understood.

If what is being done, what is being given is a philosophical type of explanation with many analyses, then he who follows may understand on that level, and when that is over there is nothing to apply. That is called explanation without entering into knowledge. Instead of being like that, what is necessary is that there be one, knowledge, and then two, entry of that knowledge into practice.

In practice too, there is a method. Where there is a practice there is always a means of making progress. Such progress has its goal, which is called realization. This is what is transmitted. The teacher has the duty of transmitting in this fashion. Thus one teaches with awareness, and with awareness means, above all, with great compassion. Great compassion does not mean a way of thinking or a way of forming one's thoughts but it's a principle, a principle of what one must communicate.

If a teacher, or master, communicates a teaching, that means first of all that he knows something, and also that what he knows, according to him, has a value. And as he knows it, so he transmits it for others. This means that he is truly doing something for the benefit of those other persons, and this is the principle of compassion. This must not be lacking in the person who transmits.

So there is a principle that must be understood, and what must be understood is transmitted with every means possible. Even if the communication makes use of very few words, or very few meanings, it's a very precise thing, applicable, and that leaves a trace of something remaining afterward. Someone may chatter for two or three hours, and afterwards, people say, "Hmm, interesting." And then it's over. That makes no sense.

The teachings are not like that. It's never to be considered as if one is simple going to hear a lecture. A lecture may also be something that you consider interesting. But a teaching means that it touches the state or condition of the person. And this principle must involve both the person who is listening and the person who is explaining the teaching.

At times it may happen that someone new to these matters doesn't even understand what's being said. They may have never followed a teaching, and it's very possible. There is nothing strange about this, he will understand what is meant by the teachings. We habitually think that when someone goes to hear a teacher, we some times think that it happened by accident, a person went there by pure chance. It just happened that my friend called me and told me that there was this teaching happening. Or I saw an announcement about it. That's how it happened, people say.

It's true that it can also happen like that. But as regards the rDzogs- chen teachings, it's very difficult that one comes to it by chance.* Even if you, yourself, the person himself does not know the cause, without doubt there is a cause, a personal cause that connects you to the teachings. It may be very simple.

Let's say there are a hundred people, who are united together. Somebody is explaining the rDzogs-chen teachings, and someone there doesn't understand. Nor does he want to understand. He was expecting something different. He goes away, he may be annoyed after a few moments. It means that the person who is teaching is not bothered if someone goes away, because he understands the cause.

We never consider that an unknown person is just beginning. For this reason, too, the way in which rDzogs-chen is presented is not gradual. But even if it's not gradual, it's practiceable by everybody. Usually when we see a person, people are asked, "Are you a Buddhist or not? What practices have you done? Have you taken refuge or not?" You all are aware that there exists this kind of system, but I don't say that this is the system of Buddhism.

It's not clear that Buddha said that all that had to be done and asked. It's the human system, because man is very square, and he has to make the teachings square. Why does he do these things? Because he has consideration or imagination that an unknown person is in fact unknown and hasn't had contact.

Somebody says, "I've never taken refuge. I've never followed the Buddhist teachings." He is automatically considered completely new. But when we talk of the rDzogs-chen teachings, can this person be considered completely new or not? The answer is no, the person cannot be considered completely new. Because Buddha himself said, "man cannot judge another man." He means, a man has his spirit, he may have his different karmas, he may have his different condition, and you can't see on his face who he is. He may be very stupid, but he may also have a very high, elevated spirit.

If I were to see among the people, my master, no one seeing him among you could know that he was a great practitioner or great master. There are many practitioners of rDzogs-chen who are like that, you can't observe anything outwardly about them. So it is not said that a person of great spirit, or elevated spirituality must necessarily present himself in silken robes, or anything of that kind.

It's very difficult to judge that which is outside. So, also when we go on the level of the teaching, for a teacher of rDzogs-chen, even if someone is considered a new person, the principal is that person's participation.

If that person's participation is not lacking, then one can transmit what has to be transmitted. If the person doesn't make it, then it means he doesn't have the capacity. Then one helps that person to do what he has the capacity to do.

This is why rDzogs-chen is not spoken of as a gradual path. The gradual path is a system like that of our ordinary social life. There is a rule, for example, the rule of schools. If you say, "I want to go to the university," the first thing that the university officers ask is, "What secondary school do you come from? Where's your diploma?" If you don't have a high school diploma, you can't enter the university. That's the system of what we call the gradual teachings.

This, in truth is a limit. Although limited, not only certain teachings, but all of our human social life is organized in that fashion. Thus when we speak of the non-gradual path of rDzogs-chen, you mustn't imagine that we are criticizing the gradual path, because many people on the gradual path criticize the non-gradual path, because whenever man imposes limits, he creates conflict.

rDzogs-chen doesn't have these conflicts. We always have the awareness also, that there exists the gradual path. Not only does the practitioner of rDzogs-chen know that the gradual path exists, what's more, he's totally familiar with it, because all the gradual paths, all of its practices, have their significance and their usefulness and needfulness. It's just that the gradual path has a different way of seeing things.

A practitioner of rDzogs-chen*, that means someone who is following the non- gradual, the direct, path, sees all of the elements of the gradual path as secondary practices. Secondary means*, you use them if and when you need them. But to say that you use them doesn't mean that you must use them. When we have a hole or a rip in our clothing, we put a patch on it. If there's no hole or rip in our clothing, it's useless to put a patch there. If you put patches on your clothing without need, this is crazy.

In this sense, the practitioner of rDzogs-chen has no obligation to do all of the gradual practices. But the way of seeing things if one is on the gradual path is a different way of seeing things. And there too there must be awareness. There is no need to go and bother or disturb or unsettle a person who is convinced that he must proceed on the gradual path. And above all there is no need to go and argue with him. Rather, we must have awareness. Thus, for these reasons, as regards practice, I also repeat and repeat the teachings.

The conclusion of what was explained yesterday, there were three things that were explained. The practice of the body, which was explained, was that of taking the Vajra position*. The Vajra position, when one is in it, you can concentrate, that you find yourself a flaming blue Vajra. Why do you do this visualization? In the moment of taking that position, you do it at the same time to extract an advantage, to gain a benefit. It's a form of protection.

You have to understand that that's not the object or the goal, that's only used above all by teachers who are accustomed to the tradition of the Anuttaratantra. But the true meaning is that being a person feels tired. I think some of you may have tried since we last spoke. It's a very tiring position. And afterwards, when you are tired of standing, you sit down and you continue in the position, after a few minutes, you just can't make it, but you're not fully tired yet. But you are tired, and you relax yourself.

When you relax yourself, having tired yourself and relaxing, you find as if your thoughts are lacking. Even if you must think something, it's very hard to do it at that moment. If somebody asks you something, you are likely to say, "Leave me alone for a moment. I'll think about it later." So the purpose is to block the mind automatically. When you block the mind, what can happen? You can get sleepy. Or you can experience the presence of the state. In that case, this is a very useful means to continue in Zhi-gnas. You have to remember, that this position has the goal, the object of the exercise is to tire you out.

Some of you may know how to read in Tibetan and may read in Tibetan books, and you may read lengthy explanations of the Vajra position. I'm quite sure you will find elaborate, very long and very complicated explanations of the Vajra position, and they will explain to you why you must do the Vajra position, what is it's meaning.

They'll explain to you that the Vajra has three points above, and that there's a correspondence with the Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya and the Nirmanakaya; that below there are three points of the Vajra; that there is correspondence with the individual state, there is a correspondence with that which is called the essence, nature, and energy, and that's united at the center. From that you can understand, that when the three conditions are united, what is the true condition of the individual, what is his unity.

There are many explanations like this. You must understand that explanations by the intellect can be given of many things and in many ways. At times, someone who studies or reads a beautiful book, may quite easily lose the sense of what things really are, because there are so many apparently important secondary explanations, that they cover up completely what is the real point. This must never happen for your practice. For every practice you must always find what is its objective.

The same is true in regard to the practice of the voice. First of all, you concentrate on the word HUM, a blue HUM. Normally there are three words that we make the most use of:

OM which is usually concentrated on or visualized as

white, as the symbol of the body, and the body also

means that it symbolizes that which is material.

AH, which is usually red, which corresponds to the

voice. And voice also corresponds to energy.

HUM, which is blue, and which signifies the void, and

the blue color represents the void and its depths.

When, as is clearly the case, we look into the sky and see its emptiness and infinite depth, all of it blue color. You must remember that there is also a correspondence here with the channels. Normally when one practices a bit of Yantra yoga or Hatha yoga, there is a great deal about the channels: the central channel, and the solar and the lunar channels. Those are also white and red. The white, solar channel* and its color correspond to matter and to method. The lunar channel* corresponds to energy and to emptiness, or void. In any case, the voice corresponds to the red color, so it's useful to understand both the correspondence of OM AH HUM, and also the channels.

When you do a visualization of this type, it doesn't mean that what you are visualizing are physical conditions. But it is the method, according to how our situation is, and we make use of it. Therefore, also the word HUM: this word HUM* corresponds to the state of the individual himself.

The state of the individual, one can't say that it has an image or a form, but if man must think of something, he has to make use of color or of shape. Without these, he doesn't have a way of thinking of something. And therefore, we use the word, because the word is automatically linked to its sound. You see a word, you know its sound. Particularly the words AH and HUM are much used in the practice of rDzogs-chen. Practice is generally done like all things, through our senses.

We have contact with everything through our senses, and through our sensory contacts, the principal one of which we make the most use, is vision. When we say vision, what is it based on? Or, where does it finish? Always in color. Because color is the essence of the elements. And for this reason, the type of practice most used is vision.

After vision, that which is most used is the practice of sound. When we speak of sound, here is where the AH and the HUM and the like have their role. So, first of all you concentrate on this HUM, the presence of the HUM you feel it, then sounding the HUM, you see emerging from it, many, many, HUMs. Slowly these expanding HUMs eliminate everything, and then they return to the principal HUM as you inhale.

It may be that when one first does this visualization, one may not succeed in synchronizing the expanding and contracting visualizations with the exhaling and inhaling of breath. You can also do it separately without worrying about the inhalation. Just exhaling and expanding the HUM as much as possible. When you're a bit used to this, you can begin to make more use of the sounding of the HUM and you can link up with the rhythm of breathing. At times, if you feel more the presence of your body, then you can expand many HUMs in a very disordered fashion, and with these, eliminate all of your own body. The goal of this is to overcome certain attachments. And above all to overcome one's limits.

There is another goal as well. Going afterward to the type of fixation that I explained yesterday, a person who, for example, doesn't succeed in finding a state of calm, there may be people who don't succeed in achieving calm or who don't understand what it is. It's very important and useful to do the practice of sounding the HUM. And then, when one is doing the practice of sound, then one is becoming familiar with this practice. This is another goal.

In any case, after this one goes to the practice of the mind. First of all I mentioned fixation. Fixation with an object, and we usually make a great deal of use of letters. This is the word AH of which we make use. Why do we use AH for example? This is the Tibetan, but you can use normal English A. It is not said you are obliged to use this. The reason for using a word, as I've already explained, is that as soon as you see it, you know it automatically, and know automatically what its sound is.

Somebody might concentrate on this but without knowing that is the Tibetan A, might think it was some kind of design, then there's no sense to it. It's much better to use the English A. If you know what this is, then it has its value, it does its work. You can fix, for example, on the letter, A, and very often we make use of fixation on the flame of a candle. One reason is to not fall asleep, not feel drowsy, because the flame of a candle is constantly moving, and it's vivid, but it's not particularly ideal, this fixating on the flame of a candle, if a person is very agitated and nervous.

If a person is nervous, it's more effective to fix on the letter A. Because the very agitated person may succeed in calming himself by fixating, pointing his mind, but sometimes instead of calming down, he seems to get worse. As soon as he sits down, he wants to get up. As soon as he gets up, he feels he ought to sit down. He doesn't know himself what he wants to do. And this very often happens. This type of person, it is important for that person to fix on the A and sound it. When one is sounding the word, with this sound he can govern and guide himself towards a state of calm. So it's, you see, very useful to fix on the word.

If a person is slightly more normal, slightly better balanced, you can fix on anything, in any direction. Just avoid fixing on something that offends your eyes. If it's a matter of fixing for just a few seconds, it wouldn't matter that much, but it may be that you're going to fix for a much longer time. And then if you do a perfect fixing, you have to try to fix as much as possible without closing or blinking the eyes. Therefore it's convenient to fix on some object that doesn't disturb your eyes.

When you fix, you mustn't open your eyes too wide, because opening your eyes too wide, it's easy to create some disturbance, or to create agitation. Nor must your eye be too closed or fixed too low, then drowsiness comes. This is not only a matter of how wide open your eyes may be, it's also a matter of whether you fix on something that's on a high or low level physically.

Where you are fixing, you don't think of that thing. I am much experienced in this regard. When I was thirteen years old, in college, the teacher in that college gave rDzogs-chen sngon'gro; we did the sngon-gro. And at the end, he taught this Zhi-gnas, he had us do a fixation on a blue flower, and I tried to do it for many days, but I was very little, and I didn't really understand what was meant by fixation.

I thought it meant you have to think about that flower, and substitute it for all other thoughts, and so I tried to do that kind of concentrating, constraining myself to have no other thoughts, blocking other thoughts. Afterwards I heard my master say that it wasn't like that, and as a result I didn't get anywhere. Once again I didn't understand.

Many people understand in this fashion. When I speak of fixing the mind, many people think that you have to substitute that on which you fix for your other thoughts, but it doesn't mean substitution. It only means that you direct your mind towards the object. And it doesn't mean you direct your thoughts towards that object. It's just that you fix your gaze, you point yourself, towards that. And at that point, you leave all your thoughts free.

If your thoughts are good, or bad, whatever they may be, that's not important. When a good thought arises, it's said that is a positive thing. It's said that this is positive because behind this thought there is an action. It means a person follows that thought, and enters into action. If there's no action which follows on that thought, then good and bad thoughts are the same thing. Thus, what the thoughts are is not important, whatever they may be, the thoughts which arise, you must not block your thinking, nor must you escape from thinking.

You must let your thoughts be, and move freely. But you continue to have a sense of the presence of the point where you're fixed, and thus you try to continue. This is the way of doing Zhi-gnas, calm of mind, with fixation.

Doing fixation like this, what must happen? One must notice the signs, as they're called, of Zhi-gnas. Some people may find a sign almost immediately. If you get a sign almost immediately, then you're better off. But even if you don't get a sign almost immediately, if you practice, within two or three days every one will find something.

What does a sign mean? There are two types of signs. We speak of external signs and internal signs. An external sign which is result of Zhi-gnas is that one who is in this state has no difficulty, above all there is no physical difficulty, and one is capable of remaining in this condition for an hour or even two or three. This is a sign of Zhi-gnas.

Or it can happen in another way: in this situation you feel like laughing, violent laughter comes, you don't know why, or you have the impulse to leap up, or you want to run, or many people burst into tears without any reason. It seems as if something strange is happening. This is also what we call a sign of Zhi-gnas.

There are other ways again in which these signs may present themselves: your face may change color, or you may look like you have a high fever, or you may feel that there is just no soul in your body. This is just an idea to show you how the signs may present themselves in diverse ways.

Why do these things occur? Because one's prana, one's physical energy is now relaxed; up to now we have always been charging our energy. You have never let them be in peace, so this moment when we calm ourselves, then these signs can emerge. The truth is these are results coming from the practice of the state of Zhi-gnas. All these are what we call external signs, and also one may have internal signs.

An internal sign might be, one example that's given, is that of a turtle placed in a vase or a bowl. Some of you may have put a turtle in a glass bowl. I have never done that myself, it's given as an example of how one might be calm; when a turtle is within a such enclosed space and realizes that there is nothing to do and so it gets calm. This means that the body, the voice, the mind, all aspects of the practitioner are absolutely without any impulse or need to move or arise to or make anything happen. This is one type of an inner sign of Zhi-gnas.

There is another example. It is said that it is like a little bird in the wind. It means a little bird who's on a tiny branch, in the wind retains his position without worry, although around him there is all kinds of movement, of wind above all, including the fact that the bird may be trembling. Thus our state of Zhi-gnas in which we find ourselves, we are there in calm, even though all around us is movement.

There is another example. Like a bee, that finds itself on a flower, that means our mind, finds itself on the point where we are fixing, as a bee finds itself on the flower, it's as if our mind is dependent on where it fixed. There are other types of examples as well, they say it's like water coming out of a pipe.

There are many different types of examples, but it's not important here to go into the intellectual level, what is important to understand is that now when I am in this state of Zhi-gnas and am capable of continuing even if around me there is a great deal of movement, I am not disturbed by it. That movement is not capable of interrupting me. Someone who is capable of continuing, that is, in the state we call Zhignas. But Zhi-gnas is a very generic term. Zhi means calm, gnas means, to be in or to find one's self in, so Zhi- gnas, to be in calm, to find oneself in a state of calm.

Normally, in a person thoughts always arise; soon as a thought arises, it disappears. From the time a thought disappears, until the next thought arises, there is a state, this is what we call Zhi-gnas. At times, this state without a thought presenting lasts a long time, this is state we call gNas-pa*, and in practice at the beginning of Zhi-gnas, above all, what we seek is this state of gNas-pa.

But you have to understand that this is only at the beginning. We don't stop with that, we don't stop as someone who just seeks gNas- pa or calm of mind, otherwise we would be very far from the teachings of rDzogs-chen. You have to understand that to go to the state of gNas-pa it's very important to have a meaning. In the moment in which you find yourself without thoughts, or yes you have thought but they don't disturb you, this is what I am calling the state of Zhi-gnas.

Then when a thought arises that's called 'gyu-ba*, which means movement. Then when this movement of thought arises, there is immediately a recognizing of this, a noticing of this. Recognizing that there is this movement doesn't mean that you judge it, it just means that you are aware of it, you have it present, and this sense of presence, this noticing of being aware, we call Rig-pa*.

Thus there are three elements:

gNas-pa, absence of thought, state of calm, above all

when there is no thought present;

then a thought arises, and this is 'gyu-ba, movement;

and as soon as the thought has arisen there is

recognition of it, noticing it, and that is called

Rig-pa.

When there are all these three present, then you continue. And this continuing with all three and finding yourself in this state of continuity, is what we call Zhi-gnas*.

Now when you do this kind of Zhi-gnas, with fixation, what kind of conclusion can you arrive at? The maximum conclusion, the most you can get to, is that you can stay in this state for a long time, that you can't be disturbed by your thought or by movement near you, that is the objective. For this you have to train a bit, you have to practice a bit. When you have done enough of this practice, then you proceed to Zhi-gnas without an object.

There is something that remains to be explained. Zhi-gnas without an object I don't want to explain today. We are not at the time yet.

(continued from the earlier session ---11/9/84)

Now, what I explained about practice yesterday, the most important elements are of the mind. I shan't repeat all of that, because by now I think it has become a bit familiar to you. But I shall repeat again something about what is called fixation with an object.

We have spoken of fixing on a word, or on the flame of a candle, or on any object which can't disturb or offend the eyes. These are three things, each a little different from the other. Then we have three objectives which are a little different from each other.

Drowsy person would find it convenient to fix on the

point of the flame of a candle. But that's not adapted

or particularly useful for a person who is very agitated

and nervous.

If a person is very agitated or nervous, or doesn't

succeed in remaining calm, or his mind never seems to

stop, in that case, it's convenient to fix on a letter

or word. To fix on a letter or word also means that it

implies to know what its sound is.

And if that person doesn't succeed even then in having a

calm and stable fixation, he can link his breathing with

the sound of that word. And by sounding it, this will

make it easier for him.

A more normal person, let us say, can fix upon any object whatsoever. Sufficient that the object chosen doesn't disturb or offend one's eyes.

When you do fixation, you have to do it slowly. You mustn't constrain yourself to do it for a long time. You might, for example, initially do it for 3 min. and take a little pause. Begin again. Continuing in this way, you slowly prolong the time. Above all, take your pause, stop when you're ahead, when you're calm and well.

You mustn't suffocate yourself. Our tendency, our nature is to continue until it becomes a matter of suffocating oneself and particularly when someone feels okay, is doing fine, he almost always continues to go on as long as possible. You mustn't do that. Instead, with awareness, you stop when you're fine. Always leaving space for yourself. And this is not only true for fixation but in general for practice, so you give yourself space.

Never suffocate yourself. And this way, practice will always proceed and go ahead. But if you constrain yourself, and you do a lot of practice for 2 or 3 days or for a week, after 2 or 3 weeks, you won't do anything. Or somebody is really active when he has a moment of spiritual sentiment or spiritual impulse, there comes a kind of instant a*. He does everything possible, and then after a few months, he is no longer a* but the exact opposite. This is really how things work for many people. And this means that the person lacks awareness. And above all, he doesn't know how to respect himself.

For this reason, in the rDzogs-chen teachings, it's always asked that one be aware of one's own feelings. rDzogs-chen masters ask this also in regard to daily life whatever the circumstances may be. If one goes to a master, and one asks him, is it better to study or that I practice? Normally we would say practice is much better. Naturally, for realization, it's much better, but a master of rDzogs-chen would never in the world tell the person you concentrate on practice, give up study.

The first thing that a master of rDzogs-chen will ask is what do you feel? Because even if it's a matter of study for example, how do we normally find ourselves? For example, let's take a son who has two parents. Let's say his parents are doctors, physicians. Very often they try to persuade or constrain the child to also study to become a doctor and another person may be an engineer and their offspring are constrained in that fashion.

This desire on the part of the parents may not be the desire of their offspring. It may happen that this is also the will of the child and the child may be pleased to take that direction. But very often, the offspring, somebody's child feels like doing something completely else. And so we get into innumerable family conflicts. This we find a great deal in the world.

Many times the children of a family are constrained, forced to study and behave as the parents wish, not as they wish. Sometimes therefore, the same children don't succeed in finishing school because they don't feel like it. This is what we mean by forcing or constraining somebody. This what's meant by suffocating somebody. This means not leaving that person any room or space. It's exactly the same thing when it comes to practicing.

In different schools of Buddhism in general, we know for example that in the sutric traditions of Buddhism, if somebody says "I don't feel like practicing today.", the sutric master will say to him, "You have to conquer your laziness. You have to struggle with it. You have to recognize that your laziness is like a devil." And that master will try to get his student to overcome that reluctance with some device or means.

It's very important to understand what is the nature. You mustn't think when you hear the rDzogs-chen teaching that this in some way contradicts or denies the teachings of the sutric level. But the difference is that we are dealing, in the one case with a person who doesn't have awareness and who is not able to go ahead on the basis of awareness. In that case, it's necessary for that person to make progress through struggle.

Many may think that today I just don't feel like practicing, and then they may ask a master of rDzogs-chen, "What should I do, I just don't feel like practicing?" The teacher might say, relax a little, have a little patience and see what happens. You have to give yourself a little room without suffocating yourself. But at the same time, a master of rDzogs-chen will always teach what is awareness. If everyday I just don't feel like practicing and that keeps happening, and it is in fact a form of laziness, there is an element at work there.

There is a missing factor and that is awareness. What I may be missing is an awareness of impermanence. If I, not just philosophically know about impermanence and time passing, but actually have that awareness present, I don't practice, then we can't just lose time everyday. It's important to use your time for practice in some fashion.

But by practice is not meant only one thing. There are many modes, many fashions of practice. One type of practice involves doing a movement. And I don't feel like doing these bodily movements today. It doesn't necessarily mean that I don't feel like being aware today.

It is very important to understand first of all what's meant by the teachings and by practicing. And know how to use the teachings in one's life. In that case, it won't be the case that you let yourself lose time without accomplishing anything.

Thus when you do fixations, you must begin with short sessions and prolong them. When you begin to have more or less signs of doing fixation as I said yesterday, like a turtle remaining in a constrained space, or like the sensation of where you're looking, and mind finds itself calm, like a bee which finds itself upon a flower. Or through all of our thoughts, our state of calm is like a little bird who finds himself in the wind, etc. It means that one has completed fixation with an object.

Fixation with an object is the preparation for fixation without an object. For many people it's easier to succeed at this then fixation with an object. If this happens for you, what do you have to do? Do you have to obligatory do fixation with an object? It's not necessary. You can proceed directly to doing fixation without an object.

For example, when you do fixation, let's say a fixation in the duration of 3 minutes, at the beginning it may seem very easy, by the third minute everything may be getting a little harder. And this can happen many many times over and over. If this fashion happens to repeat itself, then for this type of person it's important to repeat as much as possible fixation with an object.

If on the contrary, at the beginning of fixation without an object you find yourself a bit disturbed by thoughts but then as you proceed and you find after a few minutes you find everything smooth and you find yourself calm, then this type of person can very easily proceed with fixation without an object.

Then it is also said, there is the condition of the elements of the person. There are people whose condition is said to belong more to water than earth. For them it is more difficult to enter into the state of calm. But when they do enter into it, it's much more easy for them to continue in it. People linked more with the elements fire and wind, they find it very easy at the beginning. But their continuation is more disturbed. This has to do exactly with the condition of the individual. When one knows what is one's condition or situation, then one can face oneself and overcome certain difficulties.

Now, first of all for fixation without an object, you find yourself in a place. It's best of all a place out of doors, in the open. Ideal would be on a mountain. Or on a plain or in any case, a place that is not within a house. Or it could be on a terrace or a rooftop. In any case, you find yourself directed towards space, sky.

First thing is your position. Your position should not be controlled as was the case of fixation with an object. You can be in position, but you have to relax. Above all, you must not be making any efforts or force in regards to position.

Why do we do this relaxation of the posture? Because of the principle that normally both our physical body and our physical energy is always charged [up] in all ways. And this charging up of one's energy with one's body always causes the mind to be agitated. This relaxing of the body automatically means relaxing of the mind.

And then it's very important the way one is looking, that is how one is looking with one's eyes. We're not at this point fixing on an object. Instead our eyes are open and gazing into space and the sky.

Looking into space and at the sky doesn't mean looking at a precise point. We gave as one example of fixation with an object, the bee that finds himself on a flower. This means that all of our presence and attention is pointed to where our gaze is fixed. But in this case, fixation without an object, in effect it means that our mind doesn't have any support. Nothing particular to sustain. That means it doesn't settle in any one place.

In rDzogs-chen practice, in general we say, the eyes are the key or door of wisdom. And therefore when we meditate, our eyes must be open. You may notice, that in the images of the masters of rDzogs- chen, they always have their eyes wide open. Like Padmasambhava for example. This is the meaning of that fact. If we're dealing with a visualization for example, we immediately close our eyes. We close our eyes because it's much easier to visualize something in that way. When we see our vision around us, whatever doesn't correspond to whatever we're trying to visualize, it creates a disturbance. Or even it harms our visualization. For this reason people who are in visualization close their eyes.

But in rDzogs-chen practice, there is nothing in particular to create, or to think of. And there is no concept. Nor is there a need to abandon what we find around us. Everything around us, beautiful or ugly, pure or impure vision, we can know through the principle of the knowledge of our energy. It's understood as we say, in this way: The vision, what we see is the ornament of the state of the individual. For this reason, one's eyes must always be well open.

We have to know that when we fix into space, we mustn't fix, look into the light. For example in the morning, the light is arising from the east. Therefore it's convenient to face to the west. And in the afternoon, you do the contrary. But usually at midday, it hasn't been considered that it's particularly positive to do this type of practice. Not only from the motive of light but also because of our physical condition at that hour. It's a moment of relative drowsiness. And at that moment, it's convenient to do other kinds of practice. This is true for one who is doing a retreat. But if we're speaking about our usual daily life, then usually the middle of the day is occupied, noon is occupied doing something.

Now in the moment of fixation without an object, one of the principle concerns is the mind, the state of the mind, more or less must be found as if found through fixation with an object. Now you must find the mind naked. Nude or naked mind means this: normally we have the concept of subject and object. We are always conditioned by this principle or this concept. In this case, we ease the mind free of this concept. And this is the naked mind. Or we say freshness of mind. A fresh mind means that the mind is not conditioned by good or evil or any judgments thereof.

This means that one doesn't condition oneself with any judgments, and one leaves things as they are, one lets be what is. Let be what is does not mean distract yourself. Sometimes people say, well then, I won't do anything. Let happen whatever wants to happen. But this is a way of finding yourself in distraction. But we don't have distraction here. Rather you always have a sense of presence of mind, attentiveness. You learned through fixation on an object that the function of the object is to keep your mind pointed there, and not get distracted.

Now even without that object, one retains the presence of mind. More or less the mind follows in this state. And this is the conclusion of how one does fixation without an object. When one continues in this way, you do it without suffocating or constraining yourself, knowing how to continue for brief periods.

It's very very important here to alternate this practice with something like the Vajra position. Because we're accustomed to always doing something. If there is nothing to do we start to suffocate ourselves.

For example, one's sitting turns out well. The second time you don't succeed. Third time it's even worse. And this is what usually happens. Therefore it's very useful to alternate with taking the Vajra position.

If you really don't succeed in finding a state of calm of mind, it's very important to practice still more with sound. Make the sound of the word HUM. I've explained how you do the practice of the voice. And in the practice of the voice it is said you must concentrate on the HUM.

Now it's not important to concentrate on it visually. Whether you like to do fixation, or, for example, you're very confused, or if you simply don't succeed in continuing in the state of calm, without fixing on the word, you can just practice sounding the HUM or sounding the AH.

In the moment when you sound it, try to find yourself in the state of sound. Find yourself in the sound doesn't mean that you think about the sound. It doesn't mean that you follow the sound. Of course, I'm sounding it but it means to find yourself in the dimension of the sound.

You must try to do this practice and doing this one finds first of all, Zhi-gnas created by the mind. Created by the mind means I'm causing this Zhi-gnas with my effort. Then when I relax my mind, then I find a state of calm, but if I turn physically, I might lose that Zhi-gnas, that calm. Or in the moment that I find that Zhi- gnas, that calm, somebody makes a terrible noise near by, and I interrupt that calm. This means a Zhi-gnas which has been made, which has been created. What comes first is the Zhi-gnas of this type. It doesn't mean that this is a bad thing.

This is the basis on which you proceed. And then this Zhi-gnas makes progress. At a certain point this might enter, when I want to be in the state of Zhi-gnas. I become able to proceed, go on even for an hour or two hours. Without disturbance by little things, by interruptions, I become a little more familiar with Zhi-gnas. This is called natural Zhi-gnas.

But there is still progress to be made continuing with Zhi-gnas. This Zhi-gnas becomes automatic. There is no need for so much effort anymore. This state arises a little more spontaneously. And this is called final Zhi-gnas which stabilizes. These states of Zhi-gnas are the basis for meditation. Not just in the rDzogs-chen teaching but in all Buddhist teachings in general. Zhi-gnas is a fundamental basis. For which reason, it's very important to practice it.

When we come to the rDzogs-chen teaching, when one finds himself in this state, one is just about ready to enter into practice in rDzogs- chen. But you must never imagine that this is already rDzogs-chen. Not yet. But now we are just about ready to begin mention of rDzogs- chen.

In the teaching of rDzogs-chen, there are many what are called Sems- 'dzin. Sems-'dzin are like a precise guide or ways to get to Zhi-gnas. Let us say, to find a precise Zhi-gnas, there may be 10, 12, 13 defects in what you're doing. It's not said that each individual will have all of these defects. But it's possible also in that case. Each of these and how it can be regulated or resolved through practice, all of these methods for making progress in Zhi-gnas are called Sems-'dzin.

Most used in rDzogs-chen practice in general are 21 Sems-'dzin. And I'll explain also some of the more important of these. I want to explain something very useful. And it is one of these Sems-'dzin.

There is one called the Song of the Vajra, which comes from various of the Tantras of rDzogs-chen. It is a mantra. I believe that you know what the word mantra means. There are for example mantras for healing illness. Mantras for certain practices like those of the Anuttaratantra. There are mantras which have a meaning. And there are mantras for which we don't know the meaning.

In any case, mantra means words that have a sound and which transmits their capacity through sound. All types of mantra were pronounced by someone at the beginning and he who first pronounced the mantra was in full possession of that given capacity of power. And he transmitted that power of capacity by means of sound. One receives that transmission and receiving the transmission of the mantra means to hear the sound. Because we said then, in this case transmission operates through sound. Then the person having heard, recites that mantra. And then he obtains what he must obtain. This is the characteristic of how a mantra works in general.

The Song of the Vajra is a mantra but a mantra that has a meaning. Its meaning precisely is a conclusive statement of the contents of rDzogs-chen. That is, an explanation or introduction to the fundamental state of the individual himself. But as for the language of the song, it's in the language of Oddiyana. This is also called the language of the Dakinis.

We utilize it in practice for its' sound. Not a practice in which we concentrate on the meaning. We find ourselves rather in the dimension of sound. Thus one links one's capacity, the capacity of that which has been considered both subject and object.

And then in the Tantra, [there] is the lengthy explanation of this mantra, which says that this mantra must be sung, when a practicer for example, doesn't have presence or clarity. Or it's to be sung, by one who finds oneself in mental confusion.

There are many motives but above all it's to make progress in one's knowledge of the state. And to facilitate one's continuing in the state. For which reason, I will repeat, this is not something that you recite as a mantra for reasons of faith or something like that. It's not something like a prayer or anything of that type. But it's a way of linking an individual's energy with what you can call universal energy. And it's extremely efficacious for practice. For which reason, this mantra is sung. This mantra can be sung at any moment and practiced when you feel like it.

First of all, I'll read it. This mantra is also called the mantra of Thos- grol. I think many of you may have read the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Also called Bardo Thos-grol. Thos means to hear, grol means to liberate oneself. This means he who hears this sound will liberate himself. The fundamental mantra of the Thos-grol is this one. This is also called a [inaudible word].

Ka means to wear, grol means to liberate oneself. Also in Tibet, when a person dies, it may not be a person who practiced, but if one wishes to help that person, the masters gives something like a Khor-lo which is a kind of printed paper and puts it on the body of the dead person. This is considered as capable of placing a cause for eventual liberation. And for this reason, it's called [inaubible word] -grol. And also for practice, for the uses of Thos-grol, this is the fundamental mantra.

Therefore you see it's a very important mantra. It is considered a mantra, which either heard or worn, is capable of creating a precise cause for eventual liberation. Sometimes what is utilized for these purposes is the conclusive essence of this mantra, when one is not capable of utilizing the entire Song of the Vajra. In this case, there are six words or syllables, HA A HA XA SA MA. Those six syllables are also as you may have seen in the back of the mirror, and this too is called Thos-grol.

Now how is this sung? Some of you who have never sung this may have a bit of difficulty. But if we sing it two or three times together, it may become little more familiar. When we sing this, you don't concentrate on the meaning of the words. Remember what is Zhi- gnas without an object. In what state you must find yourself. While singing this you who is singing this will find yourselves in the dimension of sound. And this is the way of practicing.

To sing this means to practice. In rDzogs-chen, vision and sound are the two principal means of practice. For which reason, this is one of the important practices. Now we'll sing.
